---
layout: post
Title: A new set of tools
Date: 2014-11-26 22:00
categories: 
   - reflections
tags: 
   - science
   - computing
   - research
   - work
   - RCF
Slug: new-tools
Authors: Christina Koch
---

More musings from another week on the job...on the way home tonight 
I was thinking about the place of computing in research, particularly 
science research.  Computing as a research tool is not a new idea, but 
it does seem like research groups are moving up to a new plateau in terms 
of memory/processor speed, or, as I'm seeing at UW-Madison, the ability 
to parallelize problems and use high-throughput methods to achieve results.  

My question then: is this kind of advanced computing *necessary* for 
doing science.  I think it's safe to assume that the answer is yes.  To 
do science is, at least in part, to do computing.  It makes me think (again) 
about the difference between the content of a subject and its rules (or tools), 
like [this example of math and logic](is-this-math.html).  Computing is not 
the content of science, but it is one of the tools, a "grammar" for talking 
about science.  You can continue doing science research without it, but your 
"sentences" will be clumsy and less expressive than people who are 
drawing on the grammar of computing to express their scientific ideas.  

Hence the popularity of initatives like [Software Carpentry](http://www.software-carpentry.org/) 
and the foresight of UW-Madison in hiring people like 
[my supervisor](http://wid.wisc.edu/profile/lauren-michael/) and myself: people to 
facilitate this transition of learning a new research toolset.  It's an exciting 
time - it'll be interesting to see what happens next!  