---
layout: post
Title: Stating the Obvious
Date: 2015-12-06 21:00
categories: 
   - how-to
   - reflections
tags: 
   - programming
   - computing
   - teaching
Slug: obvious
Authors: Christina Koch
---

(This post was sparked by a conversation with my colleague Lauren, so 
I can't take full credit for all the ideas herein!)  

What stops people from doing computing?  Is it installation?  Knowing 
where to start?  Lack of training?  Lack of confidence?  

I would 
hypothesize that *not being able to see what you're doing* is a huge barrier 
to computing novices.  I prepared a short presentation on R/dplyr 
last week and realized that the hardest sell for the tool might not be 
the installation or the syntax, but the simple fact that I was asking people 
to leave a tool that allows you to see everything (Excel) for a tool where 
you can't see anything unless you ask specifically (R/dplyr).  

And most other Software/Data Carpentry tools are the same way: you leave 
the comfort of your folder icons for a wall of text (shell), a track changes 
button for arcane diffs (git), and visible spreadsheets for lines of text 
that print out bits of your data (R).  But this is a price that has to be paid: 
to really drive a computer, especially at a large
scale, you have to give up what you can see.  

When I say 
it out loud, it seems totally obvious--most advanced computing tools are 
text based and eschew a graphical interface, of course you have to 
give up visuals to do work!--but perhaps that's the point.  For those 
of us who have spent enough time in this invisible world (to the point 
where we "see" data using R more effectively than "seeing" with our 
eyes in Excel), it's too easy to 
forget that this transition from "seeing with my eyes, pointing and 
clicking" to "seeing with 
a bunch of text commands" takes time and experience.  The shift from 
visible to invisible can itself become invisible to the expert, making 
it hard to teach novices.  

If this really is the case and I'm not just making up mental blocks, I think 
there are two implications for pedagogy: 

* Draw pictures.  Give learners something to see visually, so that it's 
not all text commands.  
* Use "seeing" commands often and draw attention to them.  What do I mean by 
a "seeing" command?  Something that makes the invisible visible.  For example: 
	* shell: `pwd` and `ls`
	* git: `git status`; for branches, `git branch`; for remotes, `git remote -v`
	* R: `names(datframe)`, `str(dataframe)`
	* any programming language: print statements
	* SQL: `.tables` and `SELECT * FROM table;`
	
All of these commands allow someone to "see" the data or changes or location that 
otherwise might be unnoticed.  