---
layout: post
title: The Gaze
date: 2016-07-15 23:00
categories: 
   - response
   - reflections
tags: 
   - culture
   - gender
   - race
   - books
   - movies
slug: gaze
authors: Christina Koch
---

When getting ready for my recent trip to Norway, 
I downloaded Cyd Zeigler's recent book *Fair Play: How 
LGBT Athletes Are Claiming Their Rightful Place in Sports*.  I 
was partially motivated by the quotes in 
[this tweet](https://twitter.com/ben_scrivens/status/746966471050354689), 
where Zeigler describes the main obstacle to to coming out not 
as homophobic language, but hyper heterosexism.  That made a lot of 
sense to me, so I thought I'd check out the book and see what else 
he had to say.  

There were a lot of interesting ideas and good thoughts in *Fair 
Play*, but the thing that struck me most was an omission.  One chapter 
describes discomfort among straight
athletes about sharing a locker room with a gay teammate.  Zeigler writes:

> Instead, these [straight] men are worried that their naked bodies
> will be simply seen by the eyes of a gay man.  There's an odd 
> subconscious feeling by some straight men that if they're "looked at"
> or "hit on" by gay men, being on the receiving end of that simple act
> somehow undermines their own heterosexuality and masculinity.  

I read that paragraph and **immediately** thought: "Well, of course 
it makes straight men uncomfortable.  They've never been perceived 
as a sexual object by someone who has equal 'power' to them.  It's 
new to them, but women know all about this."  

I read on, expecting Zeigler to make that point, but he didn't!  Instead, 
he attributed the discomfort of straight men entirely 
to internalized homophobia and fear of losing their "masculinity."  

On one hand, the book is written by a man, and so maybe I shouldn't 
expect my perspective to occur to the writer and appear 
in the book.  On the other - it still always surprises 
me when a perspective that seems **so obvious** to me - simply because 
I'm a woman! - is completely 
off the radar, because the person writing is a man.  The blind spots of 
our privilege are indeed strong. 

That's part of the reason I follow at least a few black activists on 
Twitter, and on Monday, one of them gave me the language to describe my 
observation from this book.  [Brittany Packnett](https://twitter.com/MsPackyetti/) 
posted a [string of tweets](https://twitter.com/MsPackyetti/status/752481867568287746)
describing a recent vacation in Trinidad and Tobago and the utter freedom 
she felt there, away from the white *gaze*.  

*Gaze*.  That's the word I had been looking for - straight men are not 
used to being on the receiving end of a sexually objectifying *gaze*, where 
gaze is defined as looking not just to look, but with 
[power or expectation](https://twitter.com/MsPackyetti/status/752482258477461506).  Whereas 
women experience that...every day.  

When [Mad Max](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1392190) came out, my roommate 
read a lot of [commentary](http://bonehandledknife.tumblr.com/post/120671243530/doctorscienceknowsfandom-teapotsahoy)
 [and](http://bonehandledknife.tumblr.com/post/120680789755/mad-max-center-frame-and-the-male-gaze) 
 [analysis](http://bonehandledknife.tumblr.com/post/121397309610/eyes-up-here-composition-and-gaze) of the cinematography and 
how it subverted the male gaze by placing women in the center of the frame, 
drawing attention to them as people, not sexual objects.  

At the time, I didn't quite get it.  Male gaze?  What?  It sound like 
more sociological jargon that attempted to create indignity over something 
that didn't really exist.  But after reading Cyd's book and Brittany's 
tweets, and thinking about my own response to them, I get it. I'm not a 
straight man in a locker room and I'm not a black woman, but I get it.  As much 
as I can, based on my experiences and the stories of other people, I get it.  Gaze 
isn't a physical, tangible object, but that makes it no less real or powerful 
to those subjected to it.  

I have no solutions, only questions.  Can you imagine a world 
without that kind of gaze?  Where everyone has laid down 
their <strike>right</strike>privilege to expect something based on 
what they see?  