---
layout: post
title: Recent reading
date: 2016-05-03 23:00
categories: 
   - response
tags: 
   - books
slug: reading-may-2016
authors: Christina Koch
---

I have not read a ton of books so far this year (10 books in 4 months is, um, 
slow for me).  However, of the books I have read, the following two made an 
impact and I would highly recommend reading!  

*Gilead*, by Marilynne Robinson

When I was at Regent College, I had a few friends who *loved* Marilynne 
Robinson's writing.  I had read *Gilead* in a past life (as an undergrad, maybe?) 
and frankly, been unimpressed.  I remembered a book that I really had to 
push through to finish; when people raved about Robinson's prose, I was 
like, "overrated? maybe?"  

Hahaha, just kidding!  

The story: I went for a walk back in March and saw a copy 
of *Gilead* in a Little Free 
Library box.  I was in the right kind of mood to take it out, read 
the first sentence, and immediately knew that this book was not going 
anywhere -- certainly not back to the Little Free Library!  

I feel like to describe the book too much is to do it a disservice, so I'll 
try to restrain myself.  The story: a father writing his life story to his 
son.  The father is an old man, and manages to be 
neither naive nor cynical - remembering 
his life and facing his death in a way that holds together both its 
burdens/sorrows and unfamthomable gifts of grace.  And 
Marilynne Robinson's writing is indeed beautiful - the father's voice 
is simple, profound, and above all, sincere.  

*Gilead* may not be for everyone - clearly, it was not the right book 
for Christina in her early twenties.  But if you don't like it the first time,
it might be worth coming back to.  

*A Soldier of the Great War*, by Mark Helprin

I just finished this last night, and, rather like my initial experience 
with *Gilead*, I found this a long read.  First of all, it is a pretty long 
book, straight-up.  Also, while the language and writing is beautiful, 
it's sufficiently literary that you can't just effortlessly skim along. (*Hunger 
Games*, this is not.)  Finally, 
especially at the beginning, it was 
harder to read because not much was "happening."  However, 
once I had gotten into the story, it was worth going on. 

As the title would suggest, the book is about one Italian man, 
Alessandro: his youth growing up outside Rome and then his 
experiences as a soldier during World War I.  

It was the kind of book that grew on me.  Once I got into it, I realized 
that I was reading slowly because I was feeling so much empathy for 
Alessandro and his comrades.  The story is not painful to read 
because of overwhelming bloodshed, graphic depictions of violence, or 
any historical fact about World War I.  Thousands of men dying is treated 
in a single sentence - what matters more are the particular men that 
Alessandro knows and loves: their struggles and desperation to stay alive, 
to see their families again, to return to their beloved homes.  Knowing 
something about these characters, there is almost a terrible artistry 
in how they die - somehow making what is already painful, the most painful, 
the most terrible, in the worst way.  

And that's what makes the book worth reading - because it doesn't go to 
that dark place without also constantly pursuing why, in 
fact, life is still worth living, despite everything.  I kept 
reading for the same reason that Alessandro carries 
on in the story - for the glimpses of beauty, for the bits of goodness that 
can't be silenced, for exactly the love that makes it so painful when 
people die.  

Having finished *A Soldier of the Great War*, I realized that it reminded me of 
two of my favorite novels: 

* The Brothers K, David James Duncan. 
	* *The Brothers K* is about family (especially fathers and sons), 
	the broad sweep of life and the impact of war, all themes that appear 
	in *A Soldier of the Great War*.  This is another book I wholeheartedly 
	recommend to anyone who loves to read.  
* Anna Karenina, Leo Tolstoy. 
	* Like *A Soldier of the Great War*, *Anna Karenina* describes one 
	man's (Levin's) and woman's (Anna's) struggle to live beautifully 
	and find meaning in the context of their world.  Also, like  *A Soldier 
	of the Great War*, is written not so much around plot, as character, 
	and especially world (including some long descriptive passages that may 
	not be 100% necessary).

So I'm thinking that *A Soldier of the Great War* will 
definitely be a book I re-read at a later 
time and there will be more to be mined then.  