---
layout: post
title: Lessons, Remixed
date: 2016-04-29 23:00
categories: 
   - response
   - reflections
tags: 
   - lessons
   - collaboration
   - teaching
   - personal
Slug: remix
Authors: Christina Koch
---

This is a reponse and riff (shall we say remix?) on [Greg Wilson's](https://twitter.com/gvwilson)
[blog post](http://third-bit.com/2016/04/29/why-teachers-dont-collaborate.html) from earlier today on collaborative lesson development, where he 
lists reasons given for a lack of collaborative lesson development and 
why he finds these reasons un-compelling.  

My tl;dr response: I agree with his conclusion that remixing 
is the best analogy for collaborative 
lesson development.  But feel free to read on why.  

# Metaphors

I think it's fair to say that Greg finds it odd that 
other endeavours (open 
source software, wikipedia) have managed to use collaboration so effectively and 
lesson development...not so much.  But as he acknowledges 
at the end of his post, perhaps that's the wrong comparison 
to make.  I think that's closest to the truth.  Comparing 
collaborative lesson development 
with collaborative software development is like comparing apples and oranges.  

Here's two angles on why: 

## Performance

Here I'm drawing on a metaphor that's worked its way into the 
[Software Carpentry instructor training](http://swcarpentry.github.io/instructor-training/): teaching as 
a performance, comparable to music and theatre.  

Software, by definition, needs to do the same thing every time.  Its 
authors may haggle over what it should do and how to implement it, but 
once that's been decided, the written code should translate into a single 
performance - as it's meant to!  

Whereas, even if a group of teachers got together to decide what to 
do (lesson objectives) and how to do it (lesson plans), the performance 
of each teacher will be different.  

But, you say, actors all 
manage to provide their own unique interpretations of, say, Romeo and Juliet 
while working from the same script!  Surely teachers can do the same.  

Teaching *can* be like theatre.  One type of teaching - lectures - 
is definitely theatre.  There is a script, it is interpreted (sometimes to great 
effect!), the audience applauds at the end.  You might even have a very 
well-developed semester-long course that incorporates more active learning 
techniques, where it really can be delivered from a "script".  

But the 
type of teaching we're striving for in Software Carpentry feels 
a bit more like improv or stand-up comedy.  And for 
improv, you don't necessarily need or want a whole script.  You 
need some principles about how comedy generally works (timing, the 
2 joke build-up, 3rd joke payoff, say yes, etc.) and then you need 
some starting material.  Which leads to my second metaphor.  

## Writing

In college, it's common for a whole class to be assigned a single 
topic for a paper.  Everyone - in some sense - has to write the same 
paper.  But each paper will be slightly different.  Some may structure 
their argument slightly differently, some may choose to emphasize one 
line of thought over another.  

All the papers will share one thing though - their sources.  The collected 
wisdom of the academic community gets recycled and remixed in order to 
support a point or argument.  

Teaching can be like collaboratively "writing" a paper out loud.  You need 
source material (exercises, analogies, activities) in order to support 
your argument (learning objective) so that learners understand your conclusions.  

(Here's where I'll note that the most time-consuming part of paper writing 
is not necessarily the writing, 
but finding your sources, reading them, and then choosing the bits that 
best support your argument.)

# Unicorns

What the two previous metaphors have in common is the need for 
"source" material.  When it comes to teaching, I'm thinking 
of source material as good examples for live demos, 
activities that tie into learning objectives (and are well scaffolded), 
and other bits and bobs like metaphors, helpful diagrams, and funny 
videos.  That's where I would want to collaborate, mostly 
because those are the pieces that take a long time to create myself.  

What does that sharing look like?  Here are two thoughts: 

## Metadata and Remixing

When I was teaching first year calculus, I had the outline for my "paper"
(the syllabus), and I knew the math.  What I needed was material: 
actual examples and activities for my class.  

"Isn't that what the textbook is for?" you say?  Yes and no.  A textbook is 
full of math problems - but not in a way that helps me as a teacher.  My dream, 
as a math instructor, was having a set of problems with **metadata**.  (As a very 
concrete example: 

* Related rates problems not requiring a substitution
* Related rates problems requiring a substitution
* Related rates where you're finding a rate
* Related rates where you're finding a value 

With at least three different versions of each type, 
even if it just meant having different numbers in the problem.)  

Along these lines, I think the greatest value in 
the Software/Data Carpentry lessons is having 
a pile of example data/files to start with.  In the [shell lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice) 
we say: *here* 
is a set of directories and files to muck around with.  And to some extent, there's
metadata: use *this* set of files to demonstrate pipes; use *this* directory to 
show how `find` works.  Creating these examples from scratch (and have 
them be meaningful) is **hard**; remixing them, on the other hand, is easy.  I 
have remixed the [SWC Python](http://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation) lesson twice now.  It's been pretty easy to pull into its 
consistituent pieces and rearrange - not because the original lesson is flawed, 
but because I'm trying to tell the same story, with the same 
pieces, in my own voice.  

## Open Mic Night

I've come to realize that it really is valuable to observe  
other people teach.  I *always* learn something new when watching 
someone else teach material I've already taught.  To return to the comedy 
metaphor - we need fresh material.  We need to see each other's jokes.  

This is a harder kind of knowledge to pin down and share.  How do 
you share performance?  Watch other people teach?  Talk about it?  
Write it down?  What would a teaching "open mic night" look like?  

To some extent, these questions are being explored (if not fully answered) 
by the Carpentry communities, which is pretty sweet.  Folks have 
investigated a lot of options: Edthena, for 
watching videos; [workshop pre+de-briefings](http://pad.software-carpentry.org/instructor-discussion) to knowledge-share; lesson 
instructor guides with written tips; last year's [instructor
retreat](http://swcarpentry.github.io/instructor-retreat-2015/) as a sort-of open mic experiment.  There's no single solution yet, but it's awesome that 
there is a critical mass interested in this kind of sharing, and is 
really trying it out.  

# Being Human

This turned into a very long post with a lot of opinions, so I think 
it's important to end with a personal confession.  

I have all these metaphors and reasons and explanations, but 
part of the reason I don't want to collaborate on lessons, especially 
to use someone else's material, is because 
I'm egotistical.  There is part of me that wants to be creative.  Wants 
to do something 
different.  Wants to be acknowledged for my brilliant teaching.  There's 
always a little piece of me that says "I could do it better" or "I would rather 
just do it my way."    

So that's another place to start: humility.  To get off the high horse 
of my own ideas and listen to research, learners, other instructors.  Bit 
by bit (and it's not easy!), I've got to overcome an individualistic, 
teacher-centered view in 
favor of communal knowledge, learner-centered approaches.  

Collaboration is only possible when I'm willing to set aside *my* agenda to reach 
a common goal, in the context of a similarly-minded community.  