---
layout: post
Title: Making Success Accessible
Date: 2016-05-19 23:00
Categories: 
   - response
   - reflections
Tags: 
   - empowerment
   - computing
   - culture
Slug: success
Authors: Christina Koch
---

Working through some [issues on the Software Carpentry Instructor Training material](https://github.com/swcarpentry/instructor-training/issues)
today, I was struck by [this comment](https://github.com/swcarpentry/instructor-training/issues/130) by 
[Elizabeth Patitsas](http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~patitsas/): 

> "Women can be demotivated by seeing exceptionally successful and feminine female role
> models and think, "I could never be like her!" and conclude they need to be like her
> in order to succeed in CS/science."

Intuitively, this makes sense to me.  I'm much more likely to 
look at someone who is very successful or highly competent and 
promptly identify all the ways I'm **not** like that person and 
therefore never will be in the future either.  

In fact, I'd guess 
that the potential for success is not a great 
motivator in general.  There may be something comforting in hearing 
that you too are capable of great things, but to me, even 
potential accomplishments 
can read like threats, raising all my competitive, defensive hackles, 
like I'll need to prove myself.  

If, then, representative "success" is not a good motivator, how should
anyone (but particularly "successful" members of an underrepresented 
group) portray their success among a group?  Is there a benefit to the 
(supposedly common among women) behavior of downplaying one's success?  

My instinct is that falsely diminishing one's accomplishments is 
equally problematic as glorifying them.  Perhaps the middle 
point is simply shifting emphasis - instead of talking about 
the accomplishments that make it to a resume
talk about a good (and bad) moment from the process that got you there.  

It makes me think of this wonderful quote by Josh Garrels from 
the [trailer to The Sea In Between](http://theseainbetween.com/): 

> You can wield your profession, your craft, in a way that hurts 
> people because you're so good.  And so when someone can 
> present it in a way that is inviting people 
> into their joy, that's when the most beautiful things are formed.  

I love that phrase - *inviting people into their joy*.  To me it sugggests 
that, when trying to motivate people, it's helpful to convey
that the work at hand is not worth 
doing because of some final measurable criteria at the end, but because 
the experience of the journey itself will be worth it.  

How to do this?  That I don't know.  I do know that a process 
mindset requires its own maturity.  I opine away with 
the full awareness that I live my own life [motivated far more 
by final results than intermediate process](assessment.html).  But 
to motivate other people, particularly 
in areas where I have achieved "success" myself, it feels like it'd 
be worth digging into the process that got me there, pulling out memories 
of the process that were worthwhile and **fun** (and, to be fully honest, 
memories of challenges and roadblocks).  [This older post](best-practices.html) 
might be a good place to start!  

(And if the process wasn't at least a little bit worthwhile and fun on 
its own - is it something you want to motivate other people to do? )  