---
layout: post
title: Meditation on Trees
date: 2016-09-21 23:00
categories: 
   - reflections
tags: 
   - gender
   - culture
   - hope
slug: trees
authors: Christina Koch
---

Today I've been thinking about [this blog post](http://momastery.com/blog/2015/10/28/why-prejudiced/) 
which popped up on my facebook feed this morning, shared by a 
college friend.  I found it a very helpful piece in thinking about 
how to acknowledge the racism that permeates our lives, but the line that 
struck me most was in the introduction, where the author is describing 
(as a parallel to racism) the pervasive influences of sexism: 

> And it is very, very difficult for a woman to be healthy in a 
> world that is still so very sick.

I feel the weight of that sentence deep in my stomach.  I feel it 
not just as a woman, but just, in general.  That our 
world exists as a complex plane of imbalances.  That we (especially 
those who live in privileged planes) are so good at creating toxic 
air - both culturally and in the physical world.  That this toxic 
air poisons us (all of us!) and makes it SO HARD to live well.  

Somewhere in my memory (and this is how apocrypha begins), someone 
once told me that Thomas Merton compared the vocation of a monk to 
being a tree.  That is to say, there might be people in the world who 
don't do anything obviously "productive" with their lives.  Instead, their  
sole purpose is to plant themselves and lift up the world in prayer, like 
trees taking in carbon dioxide and breathing out oxygen.  

That's a beautiful image to me.  Thinking of people as trees makes me 
want to believe that I too could take in toxic 
air and transform it into something life-giving. It brings to 
mind [another blog post](https://wonderingfair.com/2013/09/23/prosperity-according-to-the-bible/), 
(this one riffing on Psalm 1) that concludes: 

> More than money, more than fame, more than power, I aspire to be 
> most of all like a tree: I want to give. I want to contribute. I 
> want my existence to nourish and bless many. I want to be a source of life.

How would my life differ if I aspired to be like a tree?  For starters, 
I'd live according to seasons of growth and rest instead of being "on" 
all the time; I'd sink my roots and not move about; I would be powerful but 
not dominate my ecosystem.  I would be instead of do.  

Obviously, being a tree is not a concrete strategy to change 
the world - quite the opposite.  Being a tree is like an icon - a 
physical symbol that points to a deeper reality.  Sometimes it's 
enough just to meditate on that icon.  Just thinking about being 
a tree feels like I'm giving myself a breath of fresh air.  